# CONCEPT

CONCEPT. Mappa concettuale. Cards -> ciò che ci ha aiutati a sviluppare il nostro concept. Needs: Enhance communication Enhance education Increase outreach Obstacles: No paths Not informative enough No guides No access to the archaeological site Not well known Financial limits Museological approach.

Experience design ->TARGET USERS - PERSONAS and SCENARIOS

(vd. Laurent)

Through our interview we were able to deduce who are the regulars of the museum and the ones the institution aims to attract. We, then, outlined four personas which could represent them.

\*\* Insert parte dell’intervista \*\*

In order to do that, we made use of the PACT framework. It helped us to think about possible scenarios and to understand opportunities and requirements when it comes to people and their approach to technologies. It made us ponder eventual problematic aspects or inconsistency of our design and even re-elaborate it thereafter.

\*\* Aggiungere paragrafo sulle A. C. e (T)

The four personas are representatives of different age ranges with their own peculiarities, capabilities, and needs. There are: Chiara, a native-digital young student who is — ??; Emma, a scholar in her 30s looking for new perspectives on the Sanniti’s culture. Being a researcher makes her mildly skilled with technologies, certainly more than the average population; Alfonso, a middle-aged archeology enthusiast. He’s an intermittent/casual user, someone who uses technology daily, but never become an expert; Gennaro, a novice user in his 60s, not particularly capable with technology, nor interested in the visit.

When we imagined these characters approaching our application, soon they suggested to us interesting issues, like, for example, that not everyone is used or attracted to the massive use of technology , especially in cultural environments. This, in particular, pushed us to develop an alternative that could fit the same exact contents and purpose. – APPROFONDIRE NELLA PARTE DEVELOPMENT

We intentionally did not create personas with too strict physical difficulties since this would have needed a whole different level of approach. However, we did include in our scenario a possible way to involve a blind user and hope this could be the right next development in the museum.

\*\* Insert cards \*\*

Even though their descriptions are quite exhaustive and include little scenarios for each of them, we additionally decided to examine Chiara in depth. She represents a specific target held dearly by the institution. The educational goal and connection to the schools of the territory have always been priorities of the MAC, therefore we decided to keep her persona highly in consideration for our design.

\*\* Insert Scenario \*\*

Museological approach. The MAC holds and manages culturally valuable objects telling the story of the Hirpini. However, objects do not speak by themselves: their historical and archaeological importance is not self-evident, and must be properly expressed and communicated to the public of laymen. Storytelling (as we may say) thus becomes an urgent matter, especially in museums which, like MAC does, consider education and dissemination as their first goal. As we read in the museum website, in fact: «Il progetto scientifico e di allestimento è stato finalizzato prevalentemente alla conoscenza della ricchezza archeologica del territorio seguendo uno standard museale di tipo tradizionale che ha puntato soprattutto alla valorizzazione delle informazioni scientifiche e didattiche.» This considered, our project began as an inductive process: we tried to investigate as thoroughly as possible the museum's peculiarities, assets, lacks and needs, and tried to design an application which was specifically tailored for them. In defining the museum needs, we considered communication to be: «Both the presentation of the results of research on collections (catalogues, articles, conferences, exhibitions) and the exposition of the objects belonging to the collections (permanent exhibitions and related information). This assumption presents the exhibition as an integral part of the research process \[...]»

This definition is pertinent to our case since, as we have seen, the museum’s exposition is far from satisfactory when it comes to informativity: no guides, no suggested paths and that it is impossible to visit the archaeological area. The notion of education, on the other side, «This has a link with the notion of awakening, which tends to raise curiosity, lead to questioning, and develop the capacity for reflection. \[...]. This development process implies change and transformation rather than conditioning or instilling notions with which it is in contrast. \[...]». Informativity, thus, is a necessary but not sufficient condition for education, especially for the education of the youngest. Education in fact, as it emerges from the above definition, is not a passive process, it is an activity: keeping this in mind, we tried to design an impactful experience in which students (and not only) could feel emotionally involved. In order to do so, we kept in consideration the concept of musealisation: as it has been pointed out, in fact «A museum object is not just an object in a museum. Through the change of context and a selection, hoarding and presentation, a change of the object’s status takes place.» This process eradicates objects from their original context: « The musealisation starts with a phase of separation (Malraux, 1951) or suspension (Déotte, 1986): some objects or things (“real” things) are drawn apart from their original context in order to be studied as documents.». This re-contextualization process – especially when the youngest are involved – can be misleading, resulting in the false perception that objects were ‘born’ musealised, risking to conceal the essence of the musealia as «cose vere». Our idea was thus to stress the link between musalised objects and their original context and use by telling their own, peculiar story. This considered, we devised an application and an interactive path guiding the visitor in their visit. Such an interactive path, whose details will be discussed in the Development section, has education as its primary object and can be classified according to a NOME TASSONOMIA E CITAZIONE: Need Interaction Space Content Virtual Visitor’s Contribution Education Closed Closed Selected objects Real with virtua + Virtual on real Not allowed

Interaction and space are closed since the visitor will be involved in a treasure hunt across the museum’s holdings, with ‘clues’ leading from one artefact to the next in a step-by-step process. The ‘participants’ will thus neither choose from which finding to start nor will the path be still meaningful if some intermediate step is skipped. The interactive path’s content will be made up of a limited number of objects, chosen to be representative of the whole collection. According to the taxonomy depicting the possible combinations of virtuality and reality developed by Beltramini and Gaiani, the application will be considered to be part of the ‘real with virtual’ category, since «this corresponds to all the museums mixing real exhibitions of real objects with interactive systems such as sensitive tables, sensitive walls, sensitive floors and interactive multimedia.» In addition, since – as detailed further – AR will be employed, the application can be also referred to the category of ‘virtual on real’, which involves «a digital reconstruction of real space that can be browsed and explored.» Finally, visitor’s contribution, is not allowed.

through the Ufita valley. The participants were able to see the various areas where findings were made. The idea is to put directions so that the path can be replicated without guides. Interesting in a digital way. In fact, the sites are not marked. Only the necropolis of the Addolorata is open, that of Serra di Marco is covered and there is nothing, the Roman Villa, Piano the hall etc. Local museums, unlike national ones, can focus on the link with the territory Make yourself known in the area. Arteo Logica maintains that not even the inhabitants of Carife themselves are aware of it and with the same possibility also those of the neighboring towns.

Future projects and perspectives. Assets.

Geographical proximity does not coincide with regulatory proximity. Currently, some elements make visiting the archaeological area problematic. It needs maintenance Bureaucratic problem: the museum is municipal, the archaeological area is under the protection of the archaeological superintendence. So while the museum is managed by the municipality (municipality of less than 2000 inhabitants) and therefore it is possible to make interventions etc. linked to regional and national projects, the archaeological area has a totally different management. Geographical proximity does not coincide with regulatory proximity. Currently, some elements make visiting the archaeological area problematic. It needs maintenance. The keys to the archaeological area are still in the museum, so those who ask can visit it. There are six tombs, four of which per chamber.

The Archaeological association (scil. the Associazione Nazionale Archeologi) is studying a welcome service for schools (most of the visitors, in addition to those who are passionate about the history of the area, are the schools). Summer school project, PCTO (work school) with the carife museum, contact with 1st grade secondary schools to welcome. Volunteers from the country who welcome more attentive visitors. to. volunteers, b. civil service, c. professionalism (they are organizing). Division of the finds by location + chronology. 4 localities: Castel Baronia (Serra di Marco), Carife (2 necropolis), Località Tiezzi ?? (furnaces). There are no internal thematic paths. Not very informative exhibition, "old" project

SALE Necropolis, from whose tombs rich ceramics and precious ornamental objects come from, have been explored in the Addolorata and Piano la Sala localities. Rustic villas of the Roman age have been intercepted in various localities of the territory, while an artisanal complex for the production of bricks of the I-II century. A.D.

The museum tells the story of the Baronia between the VI and IV centuries: The VI century BC is the century is the moment of the great Greek civilization, in which Cuma explodes in all its power, the conflict between the Greek Cuma and the Etruscan Capua and in this area political relations take place with the Tyrrhenian coast and Daunia. In addition, the formation of the Samnites people is told, whose characteristics are identified. The necropolises witness the moment of greater economic and political magnitude of the Irpinia territory (the IV century), when the Hirpini came into contact with the Romans, with whom they first had economic relations and then the wars that led to the conquest of the peninsula by of the Romans. Archaeological evidence then testifies to the disappearance of the Irpinia civilization: furnaces of the Roman age have been found that tell the moment in which Irpinia becomes Roman. The first room is about the Necropolis of Castel Baronia that is the oldest therefore datable from the sixth century BC in the necropolis we find a series of material that tell us how this culture of this territory was born and how it develops. The second room is about the necropolis of Piano la Sala, in the Ufita valley, in Carife (pit tombs). In Carife were found two necropolises: one of 5th-IV BC, the other of the IV BC. In the first, we can speak of Samnites, while in the IV century we can speak of the different tribes making Up the Samnites people, in this case Hirpini. This population is no longer just forming, but has economical and political importance, they dominate central-southern Italy, give a hard time to all the colonies of Magna Graecia, and are about to meet the Romans for these wars that will continue for another two centuries. Who are these Samnites?

Necropolis of the Addolorata, upper in the valley wrt the one of Piano la Sala. In the Addolorata, they found chamber tombs, made up of limestone slabs forming a chamber with a sloping roof (some with dromos, access corridor). They were thus monumental tombs, testifying to the importance of the people buried inside them. Therefore, the necropolis of the Addolorata is located in a particular place, at the top, to see the valley of the Ufita river: one necropolis (Piano la sala) was at the bottom, near the river, the other was at the top, looking at the valley. In the necropolis of the Addolorata there were therefore monumental tombs and very rich grave goods. With the Romans, the history of the territory changes: no longer villages, but rustic villas. Here was found a productive activity, kilns where they produced architectural terracotta. The matrices were also found, the molds from which the shape for these terracottas was taken. still, the Romans lived and died there. thus the history of this territory ends and that of Rome begins.

Traduzione interview: Interview. Guides / audio guides? Visitors are currently welcomed by civil service volunteers who have been trained on what is exhibited in the museum. The archaeological association is studying a welcome service for schools (most of the visitors, in addition to those who are passionate about the history of the area, are the schools). Summer school project, PCTO (work school) with the carife museum, contact with 1st grade secondary schools to welcome. Volunteers from the country who welcome more attentive visitors. to. volunteers, b. civil service, c. professionalism (they are organizing). Does the user also visit the archaeological area? The necropolis dell’addolorata is important and interesting, because in Campania there are no other archaeological areas of necropolis that can be visited (apart from the fourth-century tombs of the amphitheater of Capua, Santa Maria Capua Vetere). There are six tombs, four of which per chamber. Bureaucratic problem: the museum is municipal, the archaeological area is under the protection of the archaeological superintendency. So while the museum is managed by the municipality (municipality of less than 2000 inhabitants) and therefore it is possible to make interventions etc. linked to regional and national projects, the archaeological area has a totally different management. Geographical proximity does not coincide with regulatory proximity. Currently, some elements make visiting the archaeological area problematic. It needs maintenance. The keys to the archaeological area are still in the museum, so those who ask can visit it. What can be invested in in the future? The museum needs a lot. the Baronia area is archaeologically very rich. currently the museum tells a small chronological span compared to the archaeological importance of the area. In fact, we have exhibits from the sixth to the fourth century BC and then the Roman villa which takes something of the Roman age, from the second to the fourth century. In fact, however, the Barony is rich both in a prehistoric sense (Criminological Studies Center and Judicial Archeology Master and two students of the Master have begun a screening of the materials, and some are from the Neolithic / Bronze Age). The director hopes to expand the museum by displaying these materials in storage. 250 graves have been found and only about twenty are on display! And this is only for the graves. In addition there are the finds of the Roman villa, but only very few are exhibited. Added to this are necropolis from the Hellenistic and Roman age that have not been studied and exhibited. Unisa 3D project. Turin professor, Unisa researcher, computer engineer collaborating in the teaching of cultural heritage. He scanned materials with a 3D scanner with the idea of ​​experimenting with a new portable scanner. The idea would be a. to view the materials by placing them in a context b. to reproduce the finds in 3D to be enjoyed by blind visitors and others. however, the bureaucratic and funding times are short. Archaeological walk from Carife to Frigento, through the Ufita valley. The participants were able to see the various areas where findings were made. The idea is to put directions so that the path can be replicated without guides. Interesting in a digital way. In fact, the sites are not marked. Only the necropolis of the Addolorata is open, that of Serra di Marco is covered and there is nothing, the Roman Villa, Piano the hall etc. Local museums, unlike national ones, can focus on the link with the territory Make yourself known in the area. Arteo Logica maintains that not even the inhabitants of Carife themselves are aware of it and with the same possibility also those of the neighboring towns. Sense of territorial belonging. salt There are 3 rooms. On the ground floor there is the entrance + furnaces ?? of Lucate a Tiezzi ??, (Roman furnaces). Then you enter the room dedicated to the necropolis of Serra di Marco di Castel Baronia, in the window there are a series of burials, tombs, grave goods, datable between the sixth and fifth centuries. B.C. Then you go up to the upper floor. On the first floor there is a huge room where the two large necropolises of Carife are exhibited: the Pianura Sala and the Addolorata necropolis. The main nucleus are two tombs, 89 and 90 of Pianura Sala, there are 3 showcases of the 7-8 present, it is the essential nucleus of the room. Datable between the Vand IV centuries BC. Division of the finds by location + chronology. 4 localities: Castel Baronia (Serra di Marco), Carife (2 necropolis), Località Tiezzi ?? (furnaces). There are no internal thematic paths. The Samnites: not just warriors Different themes: a. personal costume (presence of fibulae, male and female belts, etc.); b. everyday objects; c. many vases could come from the same craft shop in the area (the Ufita valley is clayey so there is also the raw material) -> less immediate pecorso; d. in some tombs there are much older vases, theme of stylistic continuity, conservatism of the territory in ceramics -> preserve the shape, the ritual, the object even if they are handcrafted different, the reference model is clear (link with the Etruscan world and the Hellenistic one) Not very informative exhibition, "old" project

Storia museo. The Archaeological Museum of the pre-Roman civilization of Baronia: the exhibition spaces host the finds from the Samnite era (V-IV century BC) from tomb burials, selected from the most significant ones recovered by Werner Johannowsky - archaeologist in love with this province, at the top of the Superintendency of the provinces of Avellino, Salerno and Benevento - and by his collaborators between 1980 and 1990, in one of the many missions to our sites that led to the discovery of the necropolis between the municipalities of Castel Baronia and Carife, where the finds were most concentrated .
